>> Woodruff: A FERRY CARRYING
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE, MANY OF THEM
HIGH-SCHOOLERS, SANK TODAY IN
THE COLD, CHOPPY WATERS OFF
SOUTH KOREA.
SOME DEATHS HAVE BEEN CONFIRMED,
BUT MORE THAN HALF OF THE
PASSENGERS ARE STILL MISSING.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY, THE
MONEY RACE DRIVING THE MIDTERM
ELECTIONS, AT TWICE THE NORMAL
PACE, AND CONCENTRATED ON A
HANDFUL RACES THAT COULD
DETERMINE WHICH PARTY CONTROLS
THE SENATE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, THE STORY OF
WOMEN LIKE THESE, CHOOSING TO
LIVE TOGETHER LATER IN LIFE.
IT'S HOW THEY'RE FACING THE
CHALLENGES OF THEIR "GOLDEN
YEARS."
>> THE SETUP WE HAVE HERE IS
GOING TO HELP ME BE INDEPENDENT
FOR A LONG TIME.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STESRING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: GRIEF SETTLED OVER
SOUTH KOREA TODAY, AFTER A FERRY
DISASTER AT SEA.
HUNDREDS OF HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
WERE ON BOARD THE VESSEL THAT
CAPSIZED AND SANK.
OFFICIALS CONFIRMED SIX DEATHS,
BUT 290 OTHERS WERE STILL
MISSING, MANY HOURS LATER.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JONATHAN MILLER OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Reporter: IN THE YELLOW SEA,
A FEW MILES OFF SOUTH KOREA'S
ROCKY COAST, THE 150 METER LONG,
6,000 TON FERRY, THE SEWOL, HAS
CAPSIZED IN 30 METERS OF WATER.
ON BOARD, 459 PASSENGERS.
AMONG THEM MORE THAN 300
TEENAGERS EN ROUTE TO A SCHOOL
FIELD TRIP ON A VOLCANIC ISLAND
IN THE SOUTH.
THE FERRY HAD SAILED THROUGH THE
NIGHT AFTER LEAVING INCHEON NEAR
THE CAPITAL, SEOUL.
ROLLED AND SANK IN TWO HOURS
FLAT.
AS THE NEWS BREAKS, DISTRAUGHT
MOMS AND DADS CONVERGE ON THE
HIGH SCHOOL.
INSIDE, THEY'RE SCOURING THE
WHITE BOARD FOR NAMES.
THERE'S CONFUSION.
AT FIRST THE SCHOOL SAID ALL THE
STUDENTS WERE SAFE.
BUT THEY WEREN'T.
>> ( translated ): I FEEL LIKE
MY HEART STOPPED.
I CAN'T DESCRIBE IT IN WORDS.
I'M TOO SHOCKED.
EVEN THE WORD SHOCKED DOESN'T
DESCRIBE HOW I FEEL.
>> Reporter: CONFLICTING
COMMANDS ON BOARD LED TO CHAOS,
IT SEEMS.
SOME STAYED PUT AS INSTRUCTED.
OTHERS DONNED LIFE-VESTS AND
JUMPED INTO THE COLD SEA.
THEY WERE THE SURVIVORS.
BELOW DECK, A TERRIFIED TEENAGER
FILMS THIS.
"THE WATER IS RISING, THE WATER
IS RISING," SHE SCREAMS.
OTHERS ARE ON THEIR SMART
PHONES.
THE SOUTH KOREAN MEDIA LATER
A DAUGHTER TEXTS HER DAD,
"THE FERRY'S TILTED TOO MUCH.
I CAN'T MOVE.
IT WOULD BE EVEN MORE DANGEROUS
IF I TRIED."
HER FATHER PLEADS WITH HER TO
GET OUTSIDE.
"NO DAD, I CAN'T GET OUT RIGHT
NOW," SHE SAYS.
"THE FERRY IS AT TOO MUCH OF AN
ANGLE TO WALK."
WE DON'T KNOW IF THAT WAS THEIR
LAST COMMUNICATION.
THESE PICTURES ILLUSTRATE HER
PLIGHT.
THEY WERE POSTED ON YOUTUBE,
FILMED ABOARD THE LISTING SHIP.
AT 9:27, HALF AN HOUR AFTER THE
SHIP SENT IT'S FIRST DISTRESS
CALL, A SON TEXTS HIS MOTHER:
"MUM, IN CASE I DON'T GET A
CHANCE TO SPEAK TO YOU, I'M
LEAVING YOU THIS MESSAGE.
I LOVE YOU."
APPARENTLY OBLIVIOUS TO THE
UNFOLDING DISASTER SHE RESPONDS:
"WHY?"
THEN ADDS: "ME TOO, SON.
I LOVE YOU."
IN OTHER MESSAGES, THIS TIME
EXCHANGED BETWEEN STUDENTS ON
BOARD, ONE WRITES:  "I REALLY
LOVE YOU ALL."
AND CONTINUES:  "I THINK WE'RE
REALLY GOING TO DIE."
FISHED FROM THE COLD WATER
SCARED AND CONFUSED, THOSE WHO
HAD ABANDONED SHIP WERE ASKED
WHAT HAPPENED.
>> ( translated ): THERE WAS AN
ANNOUNCEMENT TO TELL US TO SIT
STILL, BUT THE FERRY WAS ALREADY
SINKING," THIS STUDENT SAID.
ADDING HE WAS WORRIED ABOUT HIS
FRIENDS STILL TRAPPED ABOARD.
>> Reporter: SURVIVORS HUDDLED
AND HUGGED IN THE SPORTS CENTER
NEARBY.HEARTS BROKEN.
MYSTERY SURROUNDS THE CAPSIZE.
IT'S POSSIBLE THE SEWOL HITSUBM.
SURVIVORS ALL DESCRIBE A SHARP
JOLT.
HUGE AND FRANTIC SEARCH AND
RESCUE OPERATION IS STILL
UNDERWAY.
NAVY DIVERS BATTLING STRONG
CURRENTS AND POOR VISIBILITY
HAVE ENTERED UPTURNED HULL
HOPING FOR AIR POCKETS.
PERHAPS IT'S FALSE HOPE FOR
TONIGHT THE MOOD IS SOMBER.
THE CAPTAIN UNDER POLICE
INVESTIGATION.
>> Ifill: IN WASHINGTON STATE,
FORTY DAYS AFTER A WALL OF MUD
ALL BUT WIPED OUT A SMALL TOWN
THE DEATH TOLL ROSE TO 39, WITH
SEVEN PEOPLE STILL MISSING.
THE SLIDE BURIED DOZENS OF HOMES
IN THE TINY COMMUNITY OF OSO,
ABOUT 55 MILES NORTHEAST OF
SEATTLE.
TEAMS ARE STILL PROBING THE
DEBRIS.
LAWYERS FOR THE SUSPECT IN THE
BOSTON MARATHON BOMBING WERE IN
FEDERAL COURT TODAY, TRYING TO
LIFT PRISON RESTRICTIONS ON
THEIR CLIENT.
DZOKHAR TSARNAEV HAS BEEN
CHARGED IN THE EXPLOSIONS AT THE
MARATHON'S FINISH LINE LAST
YEAR.
HE WANTS THE JUDGE TO BAR THE
F.B.I. FROM MONITORING VISITS
WITH HIS SISTERS.
TSARNAEV FACES MORE THAN 30
COUNTS IN THE DEATHS OF THREE
PEOPLE AND INJURIES TO MORE THAN
260 OTHERS.
IN A NEW ONLINE VIDEO, THE AL-
QAEDA WING IN YEMEN IS  VOWING
TO ATTACK THE UNITED STATES.
THE VIDEO SHOWS HUNDREDS OF
FIGHTERS AND SUPPORTERS
CELEBRATING A MASS PRISON BREAK
IN THE YEMENI CAPITAL, BACK IN
FEBRUARY.
THE LEADER, NASSER AL- WUHAISHI,
IS SEEN ADDRESSING THE CROWD
AND THEN, CALLING FOR NEW
ATTACKS, AS THE CAMERA PANS THE
GATHERING.
>> ( translated ): THE CRUSADER
ENEMY, DEAR BROTHERS, STILL
POSSESSES CARDS WHICH HE MOVES
AROUND.
WE HAVE TO REMEMBER DEAR
BROTHERS THAT WE ARE ALWAYS
FIGHTING THE BIGGEST ENEMY.
THE MOTHER OF INFIDELS.
WE HAVE TO REMOVE THE CROSS, AND
THE BEARER OF THE CROSS,
AMERICA.
>> Ifill: "AL QAEDA IN THE
ARABIAN PENINSULA" HAS MADE
SEVERAL ATTEMPTS TO ATTACK THE
U.S. SINCE 2009.
BUT DRONE ATTACKS HAVE KILLED
SEVERAL  OF THE GROUP'S LEADERS,
INCLUDING ANWAR AL-AWLAKI, AN
AMERICAN-BORN CLERIC.
TENSIONS ALONG SYRIA'S BORDER
WITH JORDAN TURNED INTO OPEN
CONFLICT TODAY AS JORDANIAN
WARPLANES DESTROYED A CONVOY OF
VEHICLES.
THE KINGDOM'S MILITARY SAID THE
CAMOUFLAGED VEHICLES WERE IN A
RUGGED AREA NEAR THE BORDER AND
REFUSED ORDERS TO STOP.
DAMASCUS INSISTED THE CONVOY WAS
NOT PART OF THE SYRIAN ARMY.
A FEDERAL JUDGE HAS STRUCK DOWN
A NORTH DAKOTA LAW THAT BANS
ABORTIONS AS SOON AS A FETAL
HEARTBEAT IS DETECTED.
THAT CAN COME AS EARLY AS SIX
WEEKS INTO PREGNANCY.
THE JUDGE RULED TODAY THE
STATUTE CANNOT SURVIVE A
CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGE.
IT WAS UNCLEAR IF THE STATE WILL
APPEAL.
THERE'S HOPEFUL NEWS FOR THE ONE
IN TEN AMERICANS WHO SUFFER FROM
DIABETES.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
FINDS A SHARP DROP IN HEART
ATTACKS AND STROKES AMONG
DIABETICS.
THEY'RE DOWN MORE THAN 60% OVER
THE LAST 20 YEARS.
THE REPORT APPEARS IN THE NEW
ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE.
IT ATTRIBUTES THE DROP MOSTLY TO
BETTER MEDICINE AND BETTER CARE.
>> Ifill: IN ECONOMIC NEWS, THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SAYS GROWTH
PICKED UP ACROSS MOST OF THE
COUNTRY OVER THE PAST TWO
MONTHS.
TEN OF THE FED'S 12 REGIONS
REPORTED INCREASED ACTIVITY.
ALSO TODAY, FED CHAIR JANET
YELLEN REAFFIRMED PLANS TO KEEP
INTEREST RATES LOW.
THAT HELPED BOOST WALL STREET TO
ANOTHER STRONG SHOWING.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 162 POINTS TO CLOSE NEAR
16,425.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 52 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,086.
AND THE S-AND-P ADDED 19 TO
FINISH AT 1,862.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
FOLLOWING THE TIDE OF MONEY
BEHIND THIS YEAR'S MIDTERM
ELECTIONS;
UKRAINE STRUGGLES TO PUSH-BACK
PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS;
A NEW WAVE OF MILITANT ATTACKS
ROIL NIGERIA;
BABY-BOOMERS TEAMING UP FOR
THEIR GOLDEN YEARS;
AND WEST VIRGINIA'S RESPONSE TO
A TOXIC CHEMICAL SPILL.
>> Woodruff: LAST NIGHT WAS THE
DEADLINE FOR POLITICAL
CANDIDATES, PARTIES AND SOME
OUTSIDE GROUPS TO REPORT HOW
MUCH MONEY THEY HAVE RAISED AND
SPENT IN THE FIRST THREE MONTHS
OF THIS ELECTION YEAR.
ONE THING IS CLEAR:
ORGANIZATIONS NOT OFFICIALLY
LINKED TO THE CANDIDATES ARE
SPENDING AT RECORD LEVELS.
COMBINED, THESE OUTSIDE GROUPS
HAVE POURED IN MORE THAN $57
MILLION SO FAR THIS CYCLE.
THAT OUTPACES ANY ELECTION IN
AMERICAN HISTORY AT THIS
CALENDAR DATE, EXCEPT THE 2012
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WHICH
CAME ON THE HEELS OF THE SUPREME
COURT RULING PROHIBITING
RESTRICTIONS ON SPENDING.
A QUARTER OF ALL THIS YEAR'S
MONEY HAS BEEN SPENT IN JUST SIX
STATES, WHERE SOME OF THE KEY
SENATE RACES ARE PLAYING OUT.
OVERALL, MORE MONEY HAS BEEN
SPENT ALREADY IN THIS ELECTION
THAN THE ENTIRE 2,000
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION AND THE
RACES HAVE BARELY JUST BEGUN.
HERE TO TALK ABOUT WHAT ALL THIS
MEANS IS SHEILA KRUMHOLZ, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER
FOR RESPONSIVE POLITICS, A
RESEARCH GROUP THAT TRACKS MONEY
IN U.S. POLITICS.
AND DAVID KEATING, THE PRESIDENT
OF THE CENTER FOR COMPETITIVE
POLITICS, A NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATION THAT PROMOTES
DEREGULATION OF CAMPAIGN
FINANCE.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff:  SHEILA, WE JUST
REPORTED A LOT OF MONEY IS BEING
SPENT BY THESE OUTSIDE GROUPS IN
THIS CYCLE.
WE HAVE A GRAPHIC THAT I WANT TO
SHOW THAT BREAK DOWN SOME OF THE
TOTALS, LIBERALS, 29.5 MILLION
IN THIS PIE CHART YOU SEE
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS 24.3.
WHO ARE SOME OF THESE GROUPS,
EXAMPLES OF LIBERALS AND
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS?
>> WELL, ON THE LIBERAL SIDE IN
THE PRIOR CYCLE MOST ACTIVE
GROUP WAS PRIORITIES USA AND
PRIORITIES USA ACTION.
OTHERS ARE PAY TREE @MAJORITY.
CITIZENS FOR STRENGTH AND
SECURITY.
ON THE CONSERVATIVE SIDE ONE OF
THE MOST PROMINENT AND STRONGEST
AT THIS POINT IN THE CYCLE IS
AMERICANS FOR PROSPERITY.
ALONG WITH FREEDOM PARTNERS,
AMERICAN ENCORE, 60 PLUS
ASSOCIATION AND ON AND ON.
>> Woodruff:  THEY ALL HAVE
VERY PATRIOT I CAN SOUNDING
NAMES.
ALWAYS KNOWN WHO IS BANK ROLLING
THESE GROUPS?
>> IT IS USUALLY NOT KNOWN WHO
IS BANK ROLLING THE TAX-EXCEPT
501C4 AND C6.
WHICH CAN BE ACTIVE FOLLOWING
CITIZENS UNITED IN RAISING AND
SPENDING MONEY PURPORTEDLY
INDEPENDENTLY OF THE CAMPAIGN.
TO AFFECT THE OUTCOME OF THOSE
ELECTIONS.
>> Woodruff:  SHEILA, HOW
OFTEN ARE THESE GROUPS REQUIRED
TO DISCLOSE?
I THINK WE HAVE ANOTHER GRAPH
THAT I CAN WILL SHOW FOLKS THE
BIGGEST SPENDINGS, DEMOCRATIC
POLITICAL ACTION, SENATE
MAJORITY PAC AND GROUP YOU JUST
MENTIONED, AMERICANS FOR
PROSPERITY, 30 MILLION VERSUS
8.3.
THOSE ARE TWO DIFFERENT KINDS OF
GROUPS BUT GIVES YOU AN IDEA OF
THE AMOUNTS THAT ARE SPENT.
WHAT MORE DOES THIS TELL US
ABOUT WHAT THESE GROUPS ARE
DOING?
>> WELL, WE DO SEE THE
DISCLOSURE OF THE SUPER PACs
WHICH ARE INDEPENDENT
EXPENDITURE ONLY COMMITTEE.
WE CAN SEE WHERE THE MONEY IS
COMING FROM.
AND HOW IT IS BEING SPENT ON ADS
AND OTHER ADVOCACY FOR AND
AGAINST CANDIDACIES.
THAT THE POLITICALLY ACTIVE
NONPROFITS THAT HAVE GREAT
LATITUDE NOW FOLLOWING THE
CITIZENS UNITED AND THE
DECISION.
ALLOWS THEM TO PERFORM MANY OF
THE SAME KINDS OF ACTIVITIES BUT
UNDER AVAIL OF SECRECY WE CAN'T
TRACK THE FLOW OF MONEY EASILY.
JARED DAVID KEATING, WHAT DO WE
KNOW HOW THESE OUTSIDE GROUPS
SPEND THEIR MONEY VERSUS HOW THE
CANDIDATES POLITICAL ACTION
COMMITTEES WHICH ARE PRETTY MUCH
PUBLIC BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO
REPORT MORE REGULARLY.
>> WE HAVE TO KEEP IN MIND FIRST
OF ALL WHENEVER A GROUP
ADVOCATES THE ELECTION OR DEFEAT
THEY HAVE TO REPORT WITHIN
HOURS.
IF IT'S OVER $10,000.
>> Woodruff:  NAME THE
CANDIDATE.
>> HOW MUCH THEY HAVE SPENT.
EVEN IF THEY DON'T ENDORSE THE
CANDIDATE IF IT'S WITHIN A
CERTAIN AMOUNT OF TIME BEFORE AN
ELECTION, 60 DAYS BEFORE A
GENERAL MORE 30 DAYS BEFORE A
PRIMARY, THEY HAVE TO REPORT HOW
MUCH THEY SPENT.
WE ALWAYS KNOW HOW MUCH IS SPENT
IN THAT CONTEXT.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE TO KEEP IN MIND
THIS IS A YEAR WHEN CONGRESS IS
IN SESSION,ER THIS BOTH BEFORE
CONGRESS, A LOT OF THESE
CALCULATIONS ARE COUNTING BILLS
THAT ARE ADVOCATING STRICTLY ON
ISSUES.
SHOULD OBAMACARE BE REPEALED,
REFORMED, SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
AND LOT OF GROUPS ARE COUNTING
THAT AS TRYING TO INFLUENCE THE
ELECTION, BUT IT'S TRYING TO
INFLUENCE THE DEBATE ALSO ABOUT
WHERE OUR GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE
HEADED.
>> Woodruff:  THIS IS MORE
THAN JUST FOCUSED ON WHAT
HAPPENS IN NOVEMBER ALTHOUGH
CLEARLY THAT IS A BIG PART OF
IT.
>> IT'S ALL RELATED OBVIOUSLY.
WANT THE PEOPLE WHO ARE NOW
RUNNING FOR OFFICE TO TAKE
POSITIONS, YOU HAVE GROUPS
SPENDING MONEY ON GLOBAL WARMING
ISSUES, TAX ISSUES, ABORTION
ISSUES, WOULD JUST HEARD ON THE
COURT RULING.
THERE'S LOTS OF CONTENTIOUS
THINGS THIS YEAR.
>> Woodruff:  SHEILA, ANY --
SEEN ANY AFFECTS FROM THE MOST
RECENT SUPREME COURT RULING THE
McCUTCHION RULING, THE BIG OWN
DOORS?
>> IT'S TOO EARLY FOR US TO SEE
WHAT IMPACT THE RULING HAS HAD
ON FUNDRAISING BUT WE DID HEAR
THAT FUNDRAISERS WERE ON THE
HORN IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THAT
DECISION TO THOSE LARGEST DONORS
WHO HAD MAXED OUT IN PRIOR CYCLE
TO ASK FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDS NOW
TH ABILITY TO
GIVE YET MORE.
>> IT'S A BIG PLUS FOR THE PARTY
COMMITTEES AND FOR CANDIDATES
WHO ARE TRYING TO BREAK THROUGH
AND CHALLENGE THE INCUMBENTS,
ONE OF THE PROBLEMS IN A LOT OF
THESE CAMPAIGN FINANCE LAWS IS
THAT IT MAKES IT DIFFICULT FOR
CHALLENGERS TO RAISE THE KIND OF
MONEY THEY NEED TO TAKE ON THE
INCUMBENTS WHO HAVE THE NAME
I.D. AND PERKS OF OFFICE.
>> Woodruff:  IT GIVES THE
CHALLENGERS A LEG UP.
>> LESS RESTRAINT THAN THEY HAD
PARTY.
>> THE PARTY COMMITTEES WOULD BE
BIGGER FACTOR IN THIS ELECTION
CYCLE THAN THEY WERE IN THE LAST
CYCLE.
>> HOW DO BOTH OF YOU, HOW DO
YOU SEE THIS AS HEALTHY OR NOT
FOR DEMOCRACY TO HAVE THIS MUCH
MONEY IN POLITICS AND MONEY THAT
ISN'T ALL REPORTEDLY, WE DON'T
KNOW IN THE CASE OF THESE OUTS
SIDE GROUPS WHO THE DONORS ARE,
WE DON'T KNOW -- MAY NOT KNOW
NOR AWHILE HOW THE MONEY IS
BEING SPENT.
>> I THINK MOST PEOPLE LOGICALLY
WANT AND EXPECT THE PARTIES TO
PLAY A ROLE IN POLITICS AND TO
SUPPORT THEIR CANDIDATES AND SO
WITH THIS RULING THEY'RE ABLE TO
CLAW BACK SOME OF THE MONEY THAT
HAD PREVIOUSLY BEEN GOING TO THE
INDEPENDENT OUTSIDE
ORGANIZATIONS.
AND SO I THINK THAT IS ARGUABLY
A POSITIVE STEP.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT RETURNS US
EFFECTIVELY TO THE DAY OF SOFT
MONEY WHERE THE PARTIES ARE NOW
COURTING THE VERY ELITE TOP
DONORS WHO WERE ALREADY
INFLUENTIAL TO ASK FOR YET MORE
MONEY AND THE QUESTION IS WHAT
WILL THEY RETURN -- WHAT WILL BE
EXTENDED TO THOSE LARGE DONORS.
THERE HAVE BEEN DONOR REWARD
PROGRAMS IN PAST YEARS AND SO
ONE WONDERS WHETHER WE'RE
REGIONING TO THAT.
>> Woodruff:  IS THERE A
DONOR -- ABOUT -- GO AHEAD.
>> THAT'S ONLY A PLUS WITH MORE
DEBATE ABOUT WHERE OUR COUNTRY
SHOULD BE HEADED.
POLITICAL SCIENTISTS HAVE
STUDIED SPENDING AND ELECTIONS,
FIND WHEN THERE IS MORE SPENDING
THERE'S MORE MESSAGE.
AND MORE PEOPLE ARE PAYING
ATTENTION.
VOTERS ARE BETTER INFORMED AND
THINK TURN OUT IN HIGHER
NUMBERS.
I THINK THESE ARE ALL POSITIVE
THINGS FOR OUR DEMOCRACY ACROSS
THE BOARD.
>> Woodruff:  WHAT ABOUT
SHEILA'S POINT THAT NOW THE
ATTENTION, WEIGHT OF INFLUENCE
GRAVITATES TOWARDS THOSE WITH
THE MOST MONEY.
>> I THINK ULTIMATELY THE VOTERS
ARE IN CHARGEF VOTERS DON'T LIKE
WHO IS BACKING THESE CANDIDATES
THEY CONTROL THE VOTING BOOTH
THAT IS HOW THINGS GET DONE.
YOU HAVE TO LOOK, SELF-FUNDED
CANDIDATES THEY OFTEN FLAME OUT.
MONEY DOESN'T EQUAL VICTORY.
IT JUST MEANS SPEECH.
>> Woodruff:  HOW DO YOU SEE
THAT?
>> DISCLOSURE JUST GOT A LOT
MORE COMPLICATED.
'S BIG ENOUGH CHORE THAT
WE TRY TO UNDERTAKE TO TRACK WHO
THESE LARGEST INDIVIDUAL DONORS
ARE THAT ARE GIVIN THE
CANDIDATES' PACs AND PARTIES.
IT IS NOT TRUE THAT VOTERS HAVE
ACCESS TO THE INFORMATION THEY
NEED TO REALLY UNDERSTAND WHO IS
BANK ROLLING EFFORTS TO ELECT
THESE CANDIDATES.
THEY HAVE MORE INFORMATION ABOUT
THE MONEY THAT IS GOING IN TO
THE CANDIDATES -- POCKETS OF THE
CANDIDATES AND PARTIES, KNOW FAR
LESS WHO IS BANK ROLLING OUTSIDE
EFFORTS WHICH CAN BE
DETERMINATIVE IN CLOSE RACES.
>> Woodruff:  WHICH IS IT, DO
THEY KNOW OR DON'T THEY KNOW?
>> A LOT OF THE PROBLEM WITH THE
DISCLOSURE IN SOME OF THE STATES
IT'S GENERATING JUNK DISCLOSURE
WHERE THE MONEY THAT IS BEING
RECORDED HAS NOTHING DO WITH
WITH THE AD ON THE AIR.
OUR GROUP WON A RULING IN THE
STATE OF DELAWARE WHERE DELAWARE
WAS TRYING TO FORCE DISCLOSURE
FOR GROUPS THAT ARE PUBLISHING
VOTER GUIDES, THINGS LIKE
PROJECT VOTE SMART THAT SORT OF
THING.
WHICH IS I THINK A RIDICULOUS
LEVEL OF DISCLOSURE.
>> Woodruff:  WELL, THIS IS
SOMETHING WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO LOOK AT THROUGHOUT
THIS ELION CYCLE WE THANK YOU
BOTH, DAVID KEATING, SHEILA
KRUMHOLZ.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AS DIPLOMATS PREPARE
FOR TALKS TOMORROW AIMED AT
REACHING A SOLUTION TO THE
CRISIS IN UKRAINE, THE COUNTRY'S
GOVERNMENT STRUGGLED AGAIN TO
TAKE BACK CONTROL OF THE EAST.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: UKRAINIAN ARMORED
PERSONNEL CARRIERS, FLYING THE
RUSSIAN TRI-COLORED FLAG, ROLLED
INTO THE EASTERN CITY OF
SLOVYANSK.
THE LATEST MOVE IN A SLOW-MOTION
TAKEOVER OF UKRAINIAN TERRITORY.
THE COUNTRY'S DEFENSE MINISTRY
ANNOUNCED "RUSSIAN SABOTAGE
GROUPS" CAPTURED THE VEHICLES,
AND THE UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS IN
THEM, BUT ONE OF THOSE SOLDIERS
SAID HE'D DEFECTED.
MEANWHILE, HEAVILY ARMED MEN IN
MILITARY GEAR PATROLLED STREETS
IN SLOVYANSK, AND BEAT AN
UNIDENTIFIED MAN BEFORE HAULING
HIM AWAY.
ONE OF THEM FLASHED A UKRAINIAN
PASSPORT, AND SAID HE'D COME TO
THE EASTERN REGION, KNOWN AS
DONBASS, FROM A NEARBY RUSSIAN
CONQUEST.
>> ( translated ): WE ARE COMING
FROM PEOPLES' MILITIA OF CRIMEA
AND WE ARE HERE TO HELP PEOPLES'
MILITIA OF DONBASS.
>> Reporter: TO THE SOUTH,
UKRAINIAN JETS STREAKED OVER
KRAMATORSK, WHERE THE GOVERNMENT
OPENED AN ANTI-TERRORIST
OFFENSIVE YESTERDAY AND RETOOK A
LOCAL AIRFIELD.
BUT LOCALS, LIKE THIS PRIEST,
SOUNDED DISMAYED.
>> ( translated ): MY PARISH IS
HERE, RESIDENTS OF OUR VILLAGE,
WE ARE AGAINST THESE TROOPS
ENTERING AND THIS KIND OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL ATTACKS WHICH THEY
ARE MAKING WITH PLANES FLYING
LOW.
>> Reporter: TO THE EAST, IN THE
PROVINCIAL CAPITAL DONETSK,
MASKED MILITANTS OVERRAN MORE
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS TODAY.
THEY'VE ALREADY OCCUPIED THE
REGIONAL GOVERNOR'S OFFICE FOR
TEN DAYS.
THIS MAN, UNMASKED, MADE THEIR
CASE TO REPORTERS IN FRONT OF
THE CITY COUNCIL BUILDING.
>> ( translated ): OUR MAIN
DEMAND IS TO SEND A MESSAGE TO
UKRAINE'S PARLIAMENT DEMANDING
TO PASS A LAW ABOUT LOCAL
REFERENDUMS.
THE SECOND DEMAND IS FOR THE
CITY COUNCIL TO HELP IN
ORGANIZING A LOCAL REFERENDUM
ABOUT SELF-DETERMINATION OF THE
DONETSK REGION ON MAY 11.
>> Reporter: HIS NAME IS
ALEXANDER ZAKHARCHENKO, LAST
MONTH, REFUSING TO GIVE HIS LAST
NAME, HE TOOK US ON A TOUR
THROUGH DONETSK CHECKPOINTS THAT
HE AND HIS COMRADES MANNED.
HE SAID THEY MEANT TO PREVENT
INCURSIONS BY SUPPORTERS OF THE
KIEV GOVERNMENT.
>> ( translated ): DONESTK IS A
SLEEPING GIANT, DON'T WAKE IT
UP.
IF IT WAKES UP, THERE WILL BE NO
PLACE FOR ANYONE.
KIEV CANNOT THREATEN OUR BLOOD
TIES TO RUSSIA.
LET US DECIDE OUR OWN FUTURE.
>> Reporter: IN KIEV, THIS IS
ALL SEEN AS A REPLAY OF THE
RUSSIAN INVASION OF CRIMEA.
ACTING PRIME MINISTER ARSENIY
YATSENYUK.
>> ( translated ): BESIDES
EXPORTING OIL AND GAS, RUSSIA
HAS STARTED EXPORTING TERRORISM
TO UKRAINE.
IT SEEMS LIKE THERE IS ONLY ONE
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD, NAMELY
RUSSIA, THAT DOESN'T SEE THAT
RUSSIAN GROUPS OF INFILTRATORS
ARE COMMITTING ACTS OF TERRORISM
ON THE UKRAINIAN TERRITORY.
>> Reporter: TO BACK UP THAT
ASSERTION, THE HEAD OF UKRAINIAN
COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE SAID HIS
OFFICERS HAD DETAINED 40 MEMBERS
OF THE RUSSIAN SPECIAL SERVICES,
AND AGENTS THEY RECRUITED.
>> ( translated ): ACTS OF
SABOTAGE IN THE EAST OF UKRAINE
ARE OPENLY CONTROLLED BY STAFF
OFFICERS OF THE MAIN
INTELLIGENCE ADMINISTRATION OF
THE JOINT STAFF OF THE RUSSIAN
MILITARY.
>> WE WILL HAVE MORE PLANES IN
THE AIR, MORE SHIPS ON THE WATER
AND MORE READINESS ON THE LAND.
> Reporter: MEANWHILE,
N.A.T.O.'S SECRETARY-GENERAL,
ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN, SAID NATO
WOULD FLY SORTIES OVER THE
BALTIC REGION AND DEPLOY SHIPS
INTO THE BALTIC AND THE EASTERN
MEDITERRANEAN SEAS.
HE INSISTED AGAIN THAT RUSSIA
STAND DOWN IT'S FORCES ARRAYED
ON UKRAINE'S BORDER.
>> WE CALL ON RUSSIA TO BE PART
OF THE SOLUTION, TO STOP
DESTABILIZING UKRAINE, PULL BACK
ITS TROOPS FROM THE BORDERS AND
MAKE CLEAR IT DOESN'T SUPPORT
THE VIOLENT ACTIONS OF WELL-
ARMED MILITIAS OF PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS.
>> Reporter: THE PUBLIC  U.S.
POSITION REMAINED DIPLOMACY
FIRST, AND NON-LETHAL AID FOR
UKRAINE.
STATE DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN
MARIE HARF.
>> THERE IS NO MILITARY SOLUTION
HERE.
WE DON'T WANT TO SEE MORE
ESCALATION; WHAT WE WANT IS DE-
ESCALATION.
AT THE SAME TIME WE'RE
CONSTANTLY REVIEWING UKRAINIAN
REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE AND
DETERMINING WHAT'S MOST
APPROPRIATE TO PROVIDE.
>> Reporter: IN PURSUIT OF
DIPLOMACY, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY JOINS TALKS IN GENEVA
TOMORROW WITH RUSSIAN, UKRAINIAN
AND E.U. OFFICIALS.
THE U.S. HAS ALSO WARNED OF
ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS IF RUSSIA
ADVANCES FURTHER.
>> Ifill: AND MARGARET JOINS ME
NOW.
AS THE U.S. WATCHES
THIS, AND SEES WHAT HAPPENED IN
CRIMEA WITH RUSSIA'S INVASION
AND STARTS TO TALK ABOUT WAITING
ON THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT TO
SEE WHAT THEY NEED, HOW
CONCERNED IS THE U.S. AND HOW
PREPARED IS IT TO ACT?
>> WELL, YOU NOTICED A SHIFT IN
TONE FROM THE ADMINISTRATION IN
THE LAST FEW DAYS.
FOR MONTHS NOW THEY HAVE BEEN
PRAISING, URGING THE KIEV
GOVERNMENT TO NOT PROVOKE THE
RUSSIANS AND PRAISING THEM FOR
DOING SO.
NOW GROWING CONCERN THAT THE
GOVERNMENT IN KIEV IS APPEARING
WEAK.
SAID IN AN INTERVIEW THEY CROSS
OUR BORDER WOULD WILL FIGHT.
WELL, THEY HAVE CROSSED BORDERS.
NOW YOU ARE STARTING TO HEAR A
DIFFERENCE IN TONE AND SAYING
CERTAINLY KIEV GOVERNMENT HAS
RIGHT TO RESTORE LAW AND ORDER.
BUT WHEN THE CIA DIRECTOR JOHN
BRENNAN WENT OVER IN A, QUOTE,
SECRET MEGS WHICH WAS
IMMEDIATELY OF COURSE LEAKED IN
PUBLIC, TO KIEV I'M TOLD HE TOOK
A DOUBLE MESSAGE.
HE WAS THERE TO TALK ABOUT
IMPROVING SOME INTELLIGENCE
SHARING, SET UP A BETTER
COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK SECURE
FOR THE RUSH ABS BUT ALSO URGED
THEM NOT TO TAKE ANY ACTION THAT
WOULD PROVOKE THE RUSSIANS.
I TALKED TO OFFICIAL IN KI,V WHO
SAID THEY DO FEEL THEY'RE
GETTING MIXED MESSAGES FROM THE
AMERICANS ON THIS POINT.
>> Ifill:  THAT
QUESTION.
HOW ARE THEY REACTING.
DO YOU HEAR DIFFERENCE IN TONE
NOW FROM THE PRY MINISTER FROM
THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER OR DO
YOU BEGIN TO GET A SENSE THAT
THEY THINK THE GOVERNMENT IS
WEAK AS WELL?
>> WELL, WHAT I HEAR FROM PEOPLE
IN BOTH KIEV JUST TODAY I TALKED
TO A TOP OFFICIAL IN THE
GOVERNOR'S OFFICE WHO IS NO
LONGER IN HIS OFFICE.
WHO SAID, WE ARE STILL WAITING
FOR THIS GREAT ANTI-TERRORISM
OPERATION TO BEAR FRUIT, THEY
TOOK THAT ONE AIR FIELD.
RUSSIANS HAVE PLANNED THIS SO
WELL, THEY USE OUR LOCAL PEOPLE
THEIR SHIELDS AND SWORDS AND
DESCRIBED THE SCENE.
THEY COME OUT, THEY SURROUND ONE
OF THESE TANKS, UKRAINIAN TANKS,
WHAT ARE THEY SUPPOSED TO DO,
SHOOT THEIR OWN SILL VIVIAN,
THAT WOULD TOTALLY ESCALATE.
THERE'S A FEELING IN KIEV THAT
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT LACK OF
MILITARY POWER BUT THAT THEY
DON'T HAVE MANAGERIAL HEFT THEY
DON'T HAVE CONTROL OVERALL THE
UNITS IN THE MILITARY OR IN THE
GOVERNMENTS OUT IN THE EAST.
I DETECTED A LOSS OF CONFIDENCE
IN KIEV AMONG IN IN FLEW ENAL
PEOPLE I TALKED TO IN THEIR OWN
GOVERNMENT.
>> Ifill:  IN WASHINGTON THERE
ARE LAWMAKERS SEEKING TO HAVE
INFLUENCE AS WELL.
THERE IS A DEBATE AS THERE
ALWAYS IS ABOUT WHAT THE U.S.
ROLE SHOULD BE UP TO AND
INCLUDING MILITARY ASSESS TANS
IS THAT A DEBATE THAT IS
PENETRATING THE WHITE HOUSE?
>> IT IS, THE PRESIDENT SAID TO
BE RELUCTANT TO DO ANYTHING THAT
WOULD TURN THIS IS IN A PROXY
WAR BETWEEN THE U.S. AND THE
RUSSIANS.
THERE'S NO WAY UKRAINIANS COULD
WIN ANYWAY.
SO, THEY DON'T WANT TO GIVE
LETHAL ASSISTANCE LIKE
ANTI-AIRCRAFT, THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT --
>> Ifill:  IS HA THAT WHAT THE
UKRAINIANS.
>> ASKED FROM TREVOR BODY ARMOR
AND NIGHT VISION GOGGLES ALL THE
WAY UP TO MUCH MORE INTELLIGENCE
S
THE U.S. IS, I'M TOLD, DOD NOW
TALKING TO UKRAINIANS AND
PROBABLY WILL BE MORE OF WHAT
THEY CALL NONLETHAL, MORE THAN
THE MEALS READY TO EAT.
NOT BE ARMS IT WILL NOT BE
AMMUNITION.
SHARING INTELLIGENCE IS THE
DICIEST THING.
FIRST OF ALL, THERE'S A STRONG
FEELING IN THE ADMINISTRATION
AND TELL GENERALS COMMUNITY THAT
THE RUSSIANS ARE TOTALLY
PENETRATED THEY WORKED LIKE THIS
WITH THE UKRAINIAN INTEL
SERVICES.
WHATEVER YOU SHARE YOU'RE
PROBABLY SHARING WITH THE
RUSSIANS.
AND ONE FORMER CIA OFFICIAL SAID
TO ME TODAY, YOU KNOW, WHEN WE
WERE AT THE CIA SHE SAID WE
REGARDED UKRAINE AS ONE OF MOST
IMPORTANT COUNTER INTELLIGENCE
THREATS WE FACE.
THEY WERE DAMN GOOD.
AND SO WE HAVE TO BE CAREFUL
HERE.
>> Ifill:  BACK TO GENEVA,
SEEMS THAT EVERY -- JOHN KERRY
PUT MONEY DOWN ON REAL ESTATE
THERE.
>> VERY EXPENSIVE THERE.
>> Ifill:  HE GOES BACK THE
EUROPEAN UNION AND RUSSIA,
UKRAINE, ALL MEET, WHAT IS ON
THE TABLE IS ANYBODY OPTIMISTIC?
>> IT'S INTERESTING HERE, I'VE
BEEN AT THIS FOR TWO AND A HALF
WEEKS, SAYING, WAIT UNTIL
GENEVA, GET THE UKRAINIANS AND
RUSSIA TALKING TO EACH OTHER.
EVERYBODY LAID OUT THEIR MARKERS
OF WHAT THEY WERE GOING TO
DEMAND, UKRAINIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER GOING TO DEMAND NOT
ONLY THAT RUSSIA STAND DOWN AT
THAT BOARD ARE BUT RESCIND THE
TAKE OVER OF CRIMEA.
RUSSIANS HAVE BEEN SAYING ALL
THE FAULT OF THE KIEV GOVERNMENT
PERSECUTING RUSSIAN SPEAKERS.
I'M TOLD, WE'RE TOLD THAT SECT
KERRY IS GOING TO TRY TO PUT THE
RUSSIANS TO THE TEST IN THIS
WAY, YOU SAY WHAT YOU WANT OR
MORE -- IS MORE
DIASTRALLIZATION, MORE RIGHTS
FOR MINORITIES LIKE RUSSIAN
SPEAKERS IN UKRAINE.
HERE IS THE UKRAINE GOVERNMENT
READY TO DISCUSS IT.
LET'S HAVE THE DISCUSSION.
SAME TIME WE'RE TOLD HE IS GOING
TO HAVE A IF YOU HAVE MESSAGE
WITH HIS, YOU HAVE TO BE
DEESCALATE ON THE BORDER, THE
SEPARATISTS GET OUT OF THE
BUILDINGS AND IF NOT, I DON'T
KNOW IF HE'LL SAY THIS TOMORROW,
BUT SENIOR OFFICIAL TOLD ME
TODAY WE COULD SEE NEW U.S.
SANCTIONS AS EARLY AS FRIDAY.
>> Ifill:  THAT WAS THE NEXT
QUESTION.
THEY SAID BEFORE DECEASE LATE,
BUT NOW SAYING, MAYBE HAMMER TO
BACK THAT UP.
>> BEFORE YOU ACTUALLY FULLY
INVADE.
THERE ARE STAGED SANCTIONS, TALK
ABOUT ANOTHER TIME.
WILL BE THE FULL -- BUT IT WOULD
GET AT PEOPLE AND COMPANIES
CLOSER TO PUTIN THAN NOW.
>> Ifill:  THANKS AS ALWAYS ON
YOUR REPORTING.
>> Woodruff: IN  NIGERIA,
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS HIT AGAIN
TODAY.
GUNMEN ATTACKED A VILLAGE IN THE
COUNTRY'S NORTHEAST, KILLING 18
PEOPLE.
THE INCIDENT FOLLOWS THE
KIDNAPPING OF ABOUT 100 FEMALE
STUDENTS ON TUESDAY IN THE SAME
AREA, AND A BUS STATION BOMBING
THAT KILLED 75 PEOPLE IN THE
CAPIITAL, ABUJA, ON MONDAY.
A SHORT TIME AGO, THE NIGERIAN
MILITARY SAID IT HAD FREED MOST
OF THE CAPTURED SCHOOLGIRLS.
EIGHT ARE STILL MISSING.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS MO
>> Sreenivasan: TO HELP US
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S BEHIND THE
SURGE IN ATTACKS AND THE
NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT'S ABILITY TO
RESPOND, I'M JOINED BY JENNIFER
COOKE, DIRECTOR OF THE AFRICA
PROGRAM AT THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES.
WHO IS BEHIND THIS RECENT RASH
OF VIOLENCE AND WHY THE UPTICK?
>> WELL, THE ISLAMIST GROUP THAT
WAS ORIGINALLY BASED IN
NORTHEAST IS LIKELY RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE BUS ATTACK ON MONDAY,
CERTAINLY FOR THE KIDNAPPINGS
AND THE 'TAX TODAY.
THIS IS A VIOLENT GROUP THAT
BEGAN AS FAIRLY SMALL SECT IN
THE NORTHEAST OF NIGERIA, VERY
REMOTE STATE THAT EXPANDED ITS
TAX PARTICULAR, ITS TARGETS,
INITIALLY AGAINST SECURITY
FORCES AND POLICE NOW AGAINST
CIVILIANS, SCHOOL CHILDREN,
AGAINST ORDINARY CITIZENS IN THE
CAPITAL OF ABUJA AS WELL AS THE
STATES WITHIN THE STRONGHOLD.
I THINK AFTER A LULL, THE
LEADERSHIP OF?
WHAT FRACTURED LAST SUMMER AND
CLEARLY COME BACK, IS MAKING A
STATEMENT THAT IT'S STILL VERY
MUCH ON THE SCENE.
THIS IS PARTICULARLY FRIGHTENING
AS NIGERIA SET TOE HOST THE
WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM IN THE
COMING MONTHS AND IS ENTERING A
VERY FRACTURED ELECTION CYCLE AS
WELL.
SO THESE ARE VERY HIGH PROFILE
ATTACKS.
THAT COME AT A VERY DELICATE
TIME FOR NIGERIA.
>> Reporter: WHAT ARE SOME OF
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THESE
ATTACKS?
WE'RE HEARING THAT ALMOST A
MILLION PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
DISPLACED EITHER INTERNALLY OR
EX ONE IS DISPLACEMENT.ED AND TE
KILLED SOME 4,000 IN THE LAST
FOUR YEARS.
THE DISPLACEMENT AS YOU SAY IT
MEANS THAT VERY LITTLE
INVESTMENT IS GOING IN TO THE
NORTH.
EDUCATION AND HEALTH PROGRAMS
HAVE BEEN DISRUPTED, THE ECONOMY
WHICH IS ALREADY WEAK HAS SORT
OF COLLAPSED.
AND IT MAY BE VERY POOR STATES
IN THE NORTHEAST EVEN POORER.
>> Reporter: GO AHEAD.
>> BEYOND WHICH, IT'S DAMAGED
NIGERIA'S REPUTATION I THINK AS
A PLACE THAT YOU CAN GO AND BE
SAFE AND MAKE SAFE INVESTMENTS.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS THE
NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT'S AABILITY
TO RESPOND TO THIS?
>> I THINK INITIAL LOO I THINK
IT WAS VERY COMPLACENT IN TAKING
THE GROUP SERIOUSLY BEGINNING IN
2000.
SINCE THEN IT'S COME DOWN VERY
HEAVY HANDED LIE ON THE
COMMUNITIES IN THE NORTHEAST AND
IT KILLED MANY MEMBERS OF THE
GROUP, BUT IN DOING SO HAS ALSO
SWEPT UP MANY INNOCENTS, ALONG
WITH THAT.
AND THAT HAS BEGUN TO ALIENATE
SOME OF THE COMMUNITIES WHO
REALLY ULTIMATELY COULD BE THE
BEST ALLIES IN SHARING
INTELLIGENCE AND INFORMATION
WITH THE SECURITY FORCES.
THE RESPONSE IN SOME WAYS IS
BEING COUNTER PRODUCTIVE.
PERHAPS BECOME A RECRUITING TOOL
FOR THE GROUP BUT ALSO MADE THE
COMMUNITIES LESS COOPERATIVE
WITH THE SECURITY FORCES.
THERE'S ALSO DIVISIONS WITHIN
THE SECURITY FORCES AND A LOT OF
TURF BATTLES WITHIN THE MILITARY
AND IT'S LED SOMEWHAT
UNCOORDINATED RESPONSE ONE THAT
ULTIMATELY HAS NOT PROVED VERY
EFFECTIVE.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY SORT
OF A SIMPLE WAY TO LOOK AT THIS?
IS THIS NORTH VERSUS SOUTHS THIS
MUSLIM VERSUS CHRISTIAN, ATTACKS
ARE STARTING TO ACCELERATE RIGHT
AROUND SPECIFIC CHRISTIAN
HOLIDAYS.
>> WELL, THERE IS AN ELEMENT OF
THAT IN BOKOHORAM IDEOLOGY.
INITIALLY THE GROUP WAS ISLAMIST
SECT THAT WAS AGAINST WESTERN
EDUCATION AND WESTERN VALUES AND
TRADITIONAL MUSLIM LEADERS.
BUT MOST OF THE GROUP'S VICTIMS
HAVE BEEN MUSLIM IN THE
NORTHEAST.
THIS IS VERY MUCH MORE KIND OF A
PROTEST AGAINONT
CORRUPTION OR BEGAN AGAINST
GOVERNMENT CORRUPTION, THE
POVERTY OF THE NORTHEAST BUT
IT'S REALLY MORPHED IN TO
SOMETHING THAT IS VERY BRUTAL
AND IT'S VERY HARD TO DISCERN
ANY POLITICAL AGENDA WITHIN IT.
IT'S BECOME PERHAPS MORE TIED
WITH KIND OF GLOBAL JIHADDIST
IDEOLOGY VERY MUCH STILL A
NIGERIA FOCUS.
>> Reporter: SO, WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE POLITICAL RAMIFICATIONS,
OR ECONOMIC ONES FOR THE
COUNTRY?
>> WELL, THE REEL WEALTH OF
NIGERIA RIGHT NOW LIES IN THE
SOUTH.
AND THE NORTH HAS BEEN VERY MUCH
EXCLUDED FOR THAT.
FROM THAT.
THAT HAS DEEPENED A RIFT BETWEEN
THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH IN TO
WHICH THE SECURITY SITUATION
PLAYS.
IT'S NOT JUST THE SECURITY
SITUATION THAT'S DRIVING THIS,
BUT A MUCH DEEPER FISSURE
BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH THAT
LIES IN THE LIEDER SHIP OF THE
COUNTRY HOW IT'S GOVERNED.
AS I SAID WE'RE HEADING RIGHT
NOW FOIN ELECTION PER
THE GOVERNMENT IS UNDER THREAT
FROM THE FIRST TIME FROM A
COALITION OF OPPOSITION GROUPS
THAT HAS ACTUALLY A CHANCE OF
CHALLENGING THEM.
ANDAM AND INSECURITY IS
A REAL FOOTBALL WITH MUTUAL
ACCUSATIONS ON BOTH SIDES AND
JUST AT A TIME I THINK WHEN
NIGERIA NEEDS TO PULL TOGETHER
AND KIND OF FIND A NATIONAL
SOLUTION TO THE INSURGENCY.
>> Reporter: IT WAS JUST
REVEALED THAT NIGERIA HAS ONE OF
THE LARGEST ECONOMY IN AFRICA
NOW, RIGHT?
>> RIGHT.
JUST RECALIBRATED THEIR GTP.
TREMENDOUS OPPORTUNITY IN
NIGERIA, BIG POPULATION, LOTS OF
RESOURCES, TREMENDOUS WEALTH.
AND THIS KIND OF INSECURITY AS
WELL AS KIND OF THE
MAL-GOVERNANCE THAT DRIVEN IT
REALLY PITS PUTTSAL OF THAT AT
RISK AND NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT AND
THE NIGERIAN PEOPLE OPPOSITION
LEADERS HAVE TO SEE WHAT THE
STAKES ARE IN TERMS OF THE
COUNTRY AS FEW FEWER.
IF THEY DON'T GET THEIR HEADS
AROUND AROUND ARMS AROUND THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: JENNIFER COOKE,
DIRECTOR AT THE CENTER.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: IT'S NOT UNCOMMON FOR
YOUNG ADULTS TO LIVE WITH
ROOMMATES IN ORDER TO OFFSET THE
HIGH COST OF HOUSING.
BUT WITH ONE OUT OF EVERY THREE
BABY BOOMERS NOW SINGLE AND
APPROACHING RETIREMENT, SOME OF
THEM ARE RETURNING TO THE
COMMUNAL LIVING OF THEIR YOUTH
TO EASE THE BURDENS OF THEIR
GOLDEN YEARS.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT SPENCER
MICHELS REPORTS FOR OUR "TAKING
CARE" SERIES.
>> THOUGHT MAYBE WE USE THE
PLASTIC ONE.
>> Reporter: THEY LIKE TO PLAN
TOGETHER.
EVERYTHING FROM DINNER PARTIES
TO THE BREAK DOWN OF CHORES AT
THEIR NEW CONDO IN SARASOTA,
FLORIDA.
>> SORT OF AN EGG SHELL --
Reporter: THE PRODUCTS AT THE
SHOWN THEY SHARE WITH JEAN IN
PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA.
>> I'LL BE HOPE APRIL 4.
MOST OF THAT UPCOMING WEEK IF
THERE ARE THINGS THAT I NEED.
>> Reporter: LONG TIME FRIENDS
NOW IN THEIR 60s HAVE BEEN
COORDINATING THEIR LIVES LIKE
THIS FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS.
BEFORE THAT LIKE A GROWING
NUMBER OF FEMALE BABY BOOMERS,
ALL THREE WERE DIVORCED, LIVING
ALONE AND UNSATISFIED WITH THE
SIZE OF THEIR SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
AS THEY NEARED RETIREMENT.
>> LET'S TELL THE REAL STORY.
>> SHE COOKS I DO THE DISHES.
Reporter: COMBINING RESOURCES
WOULD MAKE LIFE CHEAPER, EASIER,
MORE FUN.
THEIR RELATIONSHIP WAS EASY TO
DESCRIBE FROM THE START.
>> QUITE LIKE CATS AND DOGS.
LOTS OF DRAMA EVERY DAY.
>> NO, NO, NO.
THANK YOU NOR BEING A FRIEND
>> Reporter: THE "GOLDEN GIRLS"
SONS FIRST POPULARIZED0S RAN FOR
ABOUT YOU.
>> Reporter: NATIONWIDE ABOUT
500,000 WOMEN OFFER THE AGE MUCH
50 LIVE WITH A NONROMANTIC
HOUSEMATE.
ACCORDING TO CENSUS DATA BY AARP
THAT BOILS DOWN TO ROUGHLY
130,000 GROUP HOMES FROM COAST
TO COMPANIES.
LOUISE, KAREN AND JEAN DECIDED
TO GIVE EIGHT SHOT IN 2004 WHEN
THEY BOUGHT A LARGE BRICK HOME
TOGETHER IN MT. LEBANON
NEIGHBORHOOD OF PITTSBURGH
DRAFTED A LEGALLY BINDING
DOCUMENT LAYING OUT EVERYTHING
FROM FINANCIAL EXPECTATIONS TO
OVERNIGHT GUESTS.
IT WORKED SO WALL THEY WHERE A
HOW-TO BOOK LIVING FAR BETTER
FOR FAR LESS.
BUT THEY ALSO KNEW THE
ARRANGEMENT WOULDN'T LAST
FOREVER.
>> IT'S A GREAT BIG OLD COLONIAL
BUILT IN THE 1930s.
FOUR STORIES, THREE WINDING SETS
OF STAIRS.
AND SO IT'S A GREAT HOUSE FOR US
WHILE WE WERE YOUNG BUT WE KNOW
THAT AT SOME POINT THAT HOUSE
WILL BECOME DIFFICULT FOR US TO
MANAGE.
>> Reporter: STILL THEIR EVENT
NEED TO MOVE ON DOESN'T MEAN AN
END TO THE PARTNERSHIP WHICH THE
THREE SAY IS BECOMING MORE
VALUABLE WITH TIME.
THEY RECENTLY PURCHASED THIS
CONDO TOGETHER IN FLORIDA.
WITH NEW LEGAL AGREEMENTS IN THE
WORKS FOR WHAT THEY WILL AND
WILL NOT DO WHEN IT COMES TO
THINGS LIKE ILLNESS, DISABILITY,
INCOMPETENCE AND DEATH.
>> IF ONE OF US GOES, THE OTHER
IS YOUNG ENOUGH TO JUST GO GET A
MORTGAGE OR FIND ANOTHER PERSON
TO BUY IN.
>> WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO ABOUT
SOME OF THIS STUFF?
>> Reporter: THEY'RE NOW GUTTING
THE PLACE.
>> WE'LL WIDEN THE DOOR.
Reporter: WITH THE HELP OF
CONTRACTOR BRIAN ANDERSON AND
INDEPENDENT LIVING STRATEGIST,
REBUILDING IT FOR A FUTURE WHEN
THE WOMEN WILL BE LESS MOBILE
WHICH INCLUDES EVERYTHING FROM
SELECTING FLOOR TILES WITH
ENOUGH TRACTION.
>> THEY SLIP.
Reporter: TO CHOOSING AGE
FRIENDLY COUNTERTOPS AND
APPLIANCES.
>> HAS SOME ADVANTAGES, HAVING
TO SWEEP IS NICE TO HAVE.
>> THE WHOLE SET UP THAT WE HAVE
HERE IS GOING TO HELP ME BE
INDEPENDENT FOR A LONG TIME.
AND AT THE POINT WHICH I CAN NO
LONGER BE INDEPENDENT I WILL
HAVE ADDITIONAL RESOURCES TO PAY
FOR WHAT I NEED.
>> Reporter: BUT THIS ISN'T JUST
A WARM WEATHER RETIREMENT IDEA.
THE GOLDEN GIRLS CONISN'T
ACTUALLY GOT STARTED GOING
STRONG HERE IN MINNEAPOLIS WHERE
A FEW YEARS AGO THE MEDIAN
INCOME OF ELDERLY WOMEN WAS
$11,000 LESS THAN FOR RETIRED
MEN.
THAT DISCREPENCY PROMPTED A
LOCAL GROUP TO START TO
ORGANIZE.
CONNIE RUNS GOLDEN GIRL HOMES,
INCORPORATEA VOLUNTEER-BASE
GROUP THAT INTRODUCES ELDERLY
SINGLE WOMEN IN THE TWIN CITIES
TO THE CONCEPT OF COMMUNAL
LIVING AND TO EACH OTHER.
AT LEAST ONCE A MONTH SHE HOSTS
GET-TOGETHERS ON TOPICS RANGING
FROM PICKING A ROOMMATE TO TAX
PREPARATION.
MANY SAY SOMETHING THEY HAVE
ALREADY CONSIDERED.
>> REALLY, I'M NOT THAT KEEN ON
LIVING ALONE.
BUT THERE I AM.
>> MOST ADMIT BEING MORE THAN A
LITTLE NERVOUS A BOUT ROOMMATE
DRAMA OR EVEN SHARING A
BATHROOM.
>> GO TO BED AT NIGHT THERE
WOULD BE HALF ROLL OF TOILET
TISSUE AND THEN YOU GET UP IN
THE MORNING THERE WOULD BE NO
TOILET TISSUE.
THAT WOULD BE AN ISSUE FOR ME.
>> Reporter: SHE TELLS THEM UP
FRONT IT DOESN'T ALWAYS WORK.
MINOR DIFFERENCES CAN EASILY
RUIN EVERYTHING.
BUT SHE ALSO BELIEVES THE SET UP
IF MANAGED WELL CAN SAVE LIVES
AND KEEP PEOPLE OUT OF
RETIREMENT HOMES LONGER.
>> I SEE BOTH WOMEN WITH MONEY
AND WITH NO MONEY NEED TO DO
THIS WHO CAN FIND A PLACE HERE
FOR THAT.
AND, FOR EXAMPLE, HAVE NO MONEY
BUT THEY HAVE A HOUSE.
THEY HAVE SPACE AND THEY CAN
SHARE IT WITH SOMEBODY AND IT
WILL HELP THEM TO SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: IT'S WHY SHE HAS
BEEN SPENDING TIME LATELY
ADVISING 54-YEAR-OLD NANCY SHUNA
HOW TO MAKE HER HOME MORE
ATTRACTIVE TO A POTENTIAL
ROOMMATE.
TH FINANCIALLY STRAPPED
HAIRSTYLIST HAS FAR MORE SPACE
THAN SHE NEEDS EVEN AFTER SHE
FINISHES CONSTRUCTION ON A
BEAUTY SALON IN THE FRONT TWO
ROOMS OF THEIR HIM.
SEVERAL HUNDRED DOLLARS A MONTH
WOULD GO A LONG WAY TO HELPING
RELIEVE SOME STRETCH, SHE SAYS.
>> IT WOULD UNIFORM MY LIFE,
PHAL PSYCHOLOGICALLY,
FINANCIALLY.
AND I COULD HELP THEM, TOO.
IT'S JUST NOT A ONE-SIDED THING
FOR A WOMAN TO MOVE IN TO MY
HOME AND SHE MAY WANT TO HELP ME
WITH THINGS, TOO.
IT'S A GIVE AND TAKE, IT'S
HELPING EACH OTHER AND CARING
FOR EACH OTHER.
>> Reporter: SHNA'S NEXT STEP
FINDING HER OWN ROSE, BLANCHE,
SOPHIA OR DOROTHY AND SETTLING
IN TO A FUTURE WHERE SHE DOESN'T
FEEL SO ALONE.
>> Ifill: AND IF YOU'RE LOOKING
FOR A DOROTHY AND A ROSE TO
SHARE YOUR HOME WITH, WE HAVE
TIPS ON HOW TO DO THAT, ON OUR
HEALTH PAGE.
>> Woodruff: NOW, THE CONTINUING
FALLOUT FROM A MAJOR CHEMICAL
SPILL IN A WEST VIRGINIA RIVER
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
ANGER AND ANXIETY AMONG
RESIDENTS HAVE SPURRED NEW CALLS
FOR ACTION AND LEGISLATION.
>> Woodruff: IT'S BEEN THREE
MONTHS SINCE CHARLESTON, WEST
VIRGINIA, SUFFERED ONE OF THE
WORST CONTAMINATIONS OF DRINKING
WATER IN U.S. HISTORY.
ON JANUARY 9, A STE
FREEDOM INDUSTRIES LEAKED UP TO
10,000 GALLONS OF THE CHEMICAL
"M.C.H.M.," USED IN COAL
PROCESSING.
SOME OF IT RAN INTO THE ELK
RIVER, JUST UPSTREAM FROM A
WATER TREATMENT PLANT THAT
SERVES THE CHARLESTON REGION.
THE SPILL QUICKLY LED TO
SHUTTING DOWN THE WATER SUPPLY
FOR NINE COUNTIES.
MORE THAN 300,000 PEOPLE WERE
AFFECTED, AND THE UTILITY, WEST
VIRGINIA-AMERICAN WATER,
STRUGGLED TO FIGURE OUT HOW BAD
THE CONTAMINATION WAS.
>> IN OTHER WORDS WHAT KIND OF
QUANTITIES CAN BE PRESENT IN
DRINKING WATER AND NOT POSE HARM
TO OUR CUSTOMERS.
WE DON'T KNOW THAT THE WATER IS
NOT SAFE, BUT I CAN'T SAY IT IS
SAFE.
>> Woodruff: BY THE END OF
JANUARY, FRUSTRATED RESIDENTS
TURNED OUT AT A TOWN HALL,
DEMANDING ANSWERS.
>> WHO DO I TRUST?
DO I TRUST THE WATER QUALITY
SPECIALIST THAT'S BEEN TOLD TO
CALL ME AND I'VE BEEN
CONTINUALLY FOLLOWING UP ON, I
SPOKE TO HIM AGAIN YESTERDAY, OR
DO I TRUST YOU ALL TO GO AHEAD
AND LET MY CHILDREN, YOU KNOW,
BATHE AND STUFF IN THE WATER.
I'M EXTREMELY FRUSTRATED.
I JUST WANT TO WHO DO YOU TRUST?
>> Woodruff: IN THE WEEKS SINCE,
THE "DO NOT USE" ORDER FOR WATER
HAS SINCE BEEN LIFTED IN ALL
NINE COUNTIES.
A FEDERAL INVESTIGATION OF THE
FREEDOM INDUSTRIES SITE IS
CONTINUING, AND THE COMPANY
ITSELF HAS FILED FOR FEDERAL
BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION.
>> Woodruff: EARLIER THIS MONTH,
A BILL PASSED BY A U.S. SENATE
COMMITTEE CREATES NEW
REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
ABOVE-GROUND STORAGE TANKS.
IT DOES INCLUDE EXEMPTIONS
INCLUDING POTENTIALLY FOR SOME
CHEMICALS.
BACK IN WEST VIRGINIA, GOVERNOR
EARL RAY TOMBLIN HAS ALREADY
SIGNED A LAW ESTABLISHING NEW
REGULATIONS ON STORAGE,
INSPECTION AND EMERGENCY
RESPONSE.
BUT MANY OBSERVERS WONDER JUST
HOW TOUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
NEW REGULATIONS WILL BE.
WE TALK TO TWO FOLLOWING ALL
THIS.
EVAN OSNOS, AN AUTHOR AND WRITER
FOR "THE NEW YORKER."
AND ASHTON MARRA, THE STATEHOUSE
REPORTER FOR WEST VIRGINIA
PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
WELCOME.
ASHTON MARRA TO YOU FIRST, WHAT
IS THE FEELING NOW IN WEST
VIRGINIA, ARE PEOPLE DRINKING
THE WATER?
>> YOU KNOW, THERE'S NO RELIABLE
SOURCE OF INFORMATION THAT TELLS
US, YES OR NO PEOPLE ARE
DRINKING THE WATER.
THERE'S A SURVEY BEING CONDUCTED
BY THE LOCAL COUNTY HEALTH
DEPARTMENT AND ANOTHER SURVEY BY
STATE BUREAU FOR PUBLIC HEALTH.
RIGHT NOW ALL WE HAVE IS
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE.
I CAN TELL YOU FROM MY
INTERACTION WITH COLLEAGUES,
PEOPLE THROUGH MY REPORTING, IT
SEEMS THAT LIFE IS PRETTY MUCH
BACK TO NORMAL.
BUT ANECDOTALLY MOTHERS
ESPECIALLY MOTHERS OF YOUNG
CHILDREN, PREGNANT WOMEN THEY
ARE STILL CAUTIOUS ABOUT USING
THE WATER ESPECIALLY INGESTING
IT.
>> Woodruff:  IS THERE A LAW
THAT PEOPLE ARE BETTER PROTECTED
BECAUSE THERE'S NOW NEW
REGULATION?
>> I THINK WE'RE STARTING TO GET
THERE.
AS THE LAW MADE IT'S WAY THROUGH
THE STATE HOUSE IT BECAME MORE
AND MORE COMPREHENSIVE.
THE ENVIRONMENTALIST GROUPSA LOT
OF COMMUNITY ACTION GROUPS WERE
GLAD TO SEE THAT.
BUT I THINK IT'S GOING TO BE ONE
OF THOSE THAT TAKES THE TEST OF
TIME.
MOST OF THE MOST STRICT
REGULATIONS COMING FROM THAT LAW
WILL BE PUT THROUGH THE
RULE-MAKING PROCEDURE.
BASICALLY OUR STATE DEPARTMENT
OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION WILL
DECIDE THE SPECIFICS OF THAT
LAW.
I THINK IT'S GOING TO TAKE
LOOKING IN TO THOSE RULES,
SEEING HOW THEY PLAY OUT OVER
THE NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS, BEFORE
WE CAN REALLY SAY WHETHER OR NOT
THAT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
PUBLIC AND THE GOVERNMENT HAS
BEEN FIXED.
>> Woodruff:  YOU'VE WRITTEN
THIS PIECE FOR "THE NEW YORKER,"
HAVE BEEN IN WEST VIRGINIA AFTER
COLLEGE 15 YEARS AGO YOU WENT
BACK TO DO THIS REPORTING.
FASCINATING PIECE REPORTING ON
THE COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THE COMMUNITY, THE COAL
INDUSTRY, THE CHEMICAL
INDUSTRIES AND RELATIONSHIP
THAT'S CHANGED HOVER TIME.
>> THIS TURNED OUT TO BE A STORY
NOT JUST ABOUT A CHEMICAL LEAK
BUT HOW POLITICS AND THE KINDSER
ROLE OF GOVERNMENT, FOR
INSTANCE, CAN IMPACT GOVERNMENT
SERVICES DOWN TO THINGS AS
ELEMENTAL AS THE DELIVERY OF
SAFE DRINKING WATER.
AND WHAT YOU DISCOVER WAS OVER
THE COURSE OF THE LAST 10 OR 15
YEARS, THE WAY THAT WEST
VIRGINIA REGULATES CHEMICAL
INDUSTRIES, COAL INDUSTRIES HAS
CHANGED.
THEY HAVE SYSTEMATICALLY REDUCED
THE WAY THAT THE GOVERNMENT CAN
ACTUALLY GO IN AND INSPECT AND
POLICE THESE FACILITIES.
>> Woodruff:  YOU TALK ABOUT
THE RELATIONSHIP AND THE AFFECT
THAT ALL THIS -- THAT IT HAS HAD
ON HEALTH, ON SAFETY OF PEOPLE.
TH GUESS IN
THEAST EIGHT YEARS THERE HAVE
BEEN FIVE MAJOR INDUSTRIAL
INCIDENTS.
WHAT DID YOU FIND ABOUT ATTITUDE
OF ORDINARY FOLKS TOWARD THESE
INDUSTRIES THAT ARE THE LIVE
BLOOD OF THIS STATE?
>> THIS IS WHAT IS SO
INTERESTING.
OVER THE DECADES PEOPLE HAVE HA
HAD FLUCTUATING RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY.
AFTER ALL IF YOU ARM CHEMICAL
WORKER YOU STOOD TO EARN TWICE
AS MUCH AS AVERAGE WAGE IN THE
STATE.
FOR LONG TIME PEOPLE WILLING TO
LOOK THE OR WAY WHEN, FOR
INSTANCE, THE AIR TASTED FUNNY
OR AIR SMELLED DIFFERENT OR
WATER TASTED FUNNY.
TRUTH IS OVER THE YEARS THERE
HAVE BEEN A SERIES OF INDUSTRIAL
ACCIDENTS THAT GALVANIZED THE
COMMUNITY AND REGULAR CITIZENS
BEGUN TO PAY MORE ATTENTION TO
WHAT'S HAPPENING TO THEIR HEALTH
AND WHAT THEY DISCOVERED WAS NOT
REASSURING.
OVER THE COURSE OF THE LAST FEW
YEARS THEY, FOR INSTANCE,
PETITIONED FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO
TAKE OVER THE WAY THAT THE CLEAN
WATER ACT ENFORCED IN WEST
VIRGINIA.
SAID THAT THE STATE REGULATORS
ARE NOW NEAR COMPLETELY BROKEN
DOWN AS THEY PUT IT.
SO THERE'S A REAL RECOGNITION
THAT AT A CERTAIN POINT, THE
STATE WAS NO LONGER CARRYING ITS
END OF THE BARGAIN.
>> Woodruff:  HOW DID YOU FIND
THIS BILL AFFECTING THAT DEBATE?
>> DID IT FOCUS ATTENTION ON WAY
THAT NONE OF THESE ACCIDENTS
BEFORE REALLY HAD.
THE REASON IS THAT THIS BILL HIT
THE STATE CAPITAL IN FACT IT HIT
ON THE SECOND DAY OF THE ANNUAL
MEETING OF THE STATE
LEGISLATURE.
IT FORCED THE CONVERSATION IN A
WAY THAT THE PREVIOUS O
NOT BECAUSE AFTER ALL, IF IT'S A
LEAK, FOR INSTANCE, UP IN THE
HILLS IT DOESN'T AFFECT PEOPLE
THE SAME WAY.
IT DOESN'T DRIVE THE
CONVERSATION.
WHATEVER WITH THESE TOWN HALL
MEETINGS WHERE PEOPLE WERE
FLOODING IN AND SAYING WE NO
LONGER TRUST OUR STATE
LEGISLATORS, WE DON'T TRUST OUR
ELECTED OFFICIALS TO BE ACTING
IN OUR BEST INTERESTS.
>> Woodruff:  AND ASHTON MARCH
REMARKS WE SAW IN THAT TAPE JUST
A MOMENT AGO IN FACT WOMAN WAS
ASKING THAT VERY QUESTION.
HOW DO WE KNOW WHO TO TRUST
HERE, IN YOUR REPORTING WHAT ARE
YOU FINDING ABOUT THE LEVEL OF
TRUST BETWEEN CITIZENS
ESPECIALLY THOSE IN THIS
AFFECTED AREA AND PEOPLE WHO
THEY THOUGHT WERE PROTECTING
THEM.
>> THE MONTHS FOLLOWING THIS
CHEMICAL SPILL IT'S OBVIOUS THAT
THAT LEVEL OF TRUST HAS BEEN
BROKEN.
LAWMAKERS AS THEY WORKED ON THIS
CHEMICAL SPILL BILL, WAY TO
REGULATE THE ABOVE GROUND
STORAGE TANKS, THEIR MAIN
CONCERN WAS REBUILDING THAT
TRUST.
WE HEARD THAT OVER AND OVER
AGAIN IN SPEECHES AND DEBATES ON
BOTH THE HOUSE AND SENATE FLOOR
HEAR IN WEST VIRGINIA DURING OUR
SESSION.
BUT LIKE I SAID EARLIER, I THINK
IT'S HONESTLY JUST A TEST OF
TIME.
CAN WE RECOVER FROM THIS, CAN
OUR LEGISLATORS, LAWMAKERS,
REBUILD THAT TRUN
COMMUNITY.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE'LL HAVE TO
WAIT AND SEE.
>> Woodruff:  ALL THIS HAPPENS
AS A STATE THAT YOU WRITE HOW
THE STATE IS CHANGING
POLITICALLY, A LOT IS AT STAKE
HERE, A BIG SENATE RACE IN WEST
VIRGINIA.
HOW ARE THE PUBLIC OFFICIALS IN
WEST VIRGINIA SORTING THROUGH
THIS RIGHT NOW?
>> HISTORICALLY WEST VIRGINIA
WAS A DEMOCRATIC STATE, THIS WAS
A PLACE THAT GOING BACK TO DAYS
OF FDR HAD FELT THAT IT WAS
CLOSE TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT,
RELIED ON THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FOR HELP.
THE OVER THE LAST 10 OR 15 YEARS
AS COAL INDUSTRY FOUND IT'S IN
ECONOMIC DISTRESS IT ORGANIZED
POLITICALLY VERY EFFECTIVELY.
HAS SUPPORTED CANDIDATES FOR
GOVERNMENT IN WEST VIRGINIA WHO
HAVE BEEN -- WE CAN SAY THEY
HAVE BEEN ASSERTIVE IN MAKING
SURE THAT THE VOICE OF THE COAL
INDUSTRY WAS HEARD.
OVER THE COURSE OF THE LAST FEW
YEARS IT'S NOW BECOME DIFFICULT,
IF YOU'RE SOMEBODY WHO TAKES A
STAND AGAINST THE COAL INDUSTRY
TO MAKE SURE THAT YOU'RE GOING
TO GET A FAIR SHAKE.
I THINK THIS WEEK WHAT WE'VE
SEEN THAT IT CHANGED THAT DEBATE
A BIT.
HAS FORCED PEOPLE TO TALK ABOUT
THE FACT THAT THE COAL INDUSTRY
MAYBE HAS MORE OF A SAY IN
GOVERNMENT THAN PEOPLE WANT IT
TO HAVE IN WEST VIRGINIA.
THERE WERE CANDIDATES WHO I
SPOKE TO TO SAID, IF I TAKE A
STAND AGAINST THE COAL INDUSTRY
I KNOW THAT I'LL BE TARGETED IN
MY NEXT ELECTION.
THEY WERE WORRIED THAT IF THEY
TOOK INTEREST IN THIS CHEMICAL
LEAK THAT THEY MIGHT NOT MAKE IT
THROUGH.
I THINK THE UPSWELL OF PUBLIC
ATTENTION, THE CLEAR INDICATION
THAT PEOPLE WANT TO CHANGE, SOME
OF THOSE CANDIDATES MAY IN FACT
BE ABLE TO CONTINUE.
>> Woodruff:  ASHTON MARRA, IS
THERE ANY KIND OF CONSENSUS
ABOUT WHO OR WHAT IS AT FAULT?
HOW MUCH OF THE BLAME ARE PEOPLE
PLACING ON THE INDUSTRY, ON THIS
PARTICULAR COMPANY WHICH HAS WE
SAID IS FILED FOR BANKRUPTCY HOW
MUCH ON THE REGULATORS?
>> I THINK MAJORITY OF THE
COMPLAINTS SO FAR HAVE BEEN PUT
TOWARD THE INDUSTRY.
IT'S THE INDUSTRY'S FAULT WHAT A
LOT OF PEOPLE THINK.
I THINK AS THE INVESTIGATION HAS
UNFOLDED WE'VE SEEN THAT THIS IS
PARTIALLY THE GOVERNMENT'S FAULT
AS WELL.
OUR STATE DEPANT
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION WASN'T
EQUIPPED TO HANDLE OR TO
REGULATE THIS TYPE OF INDUSTRY
BUT IT WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS
OVERLOOKED, IT WAS A LOOPHOLE
HERE IN STATE LAW.
AND HONESTLY LOOPHOLE IN FEDERAL
LAW AS WELL.
>> Woodruff:  FINALLY, WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING THAT THAT IS A
RELATIONSHIP WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
IS CHANGING BEFORE OUR VERY
EYES.
>> IT IS.
I THINK THIS IS A MOMENT WHEN
PEOPLE ARE STARTING TO DEMAND
MORE OF THEIR ELECTED OFFICIALS,
SAY IT'S UP TO YOU TO SET THE
PRIORITIES FOR STATE REGULATORS,
HOLD COMPANIES TO ACCOUNT AND
ULTIMATELY TO PROTECT THE PUBLIC
INTEREST.
>> Woodruff:  EVAN OSNOS,
ASHTON MARRA, WE THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
290 PEOPLE WERE MISSING, HOURS
AFTER A FERRY SANK OFF SOUTH
KOREA'S SOUTHERN COAST.
MANY OF THE MISSING WERE HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS ON A CLASS TRIP.
UKRAINE STRUGGLED WITH PRO-
RUSSIAN UPRISINGS IN A NUMBER OF
EASTERN CITIES.
THE UKRAINIAN PRIME MINISTER
ACCUSED MOSCOW OF EXPORTING
TERRORISM TO HIS COUNTRY.
AND WALL STREET TURNED IN
RUSSIA CAN EXPECT FURTHER
SANCTIONS, INCREASE SUPPORT FOR
SEPARATISTS IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, HOW ONE ARTIST'S
DYSLEXIA HELPED HER TRANSLATE
THE PRINCIPLES OF NEUROSCIENCE
INTO MAGNIFICENT BUTTERFLY
SCULPTURES.
HER LEARNING OBSTACLE HAS
ACTUALLY BEEN AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
EXPLORATION AND YOU CAN SEE IT
IN HER WORK, WHICH IS ON OUR
SCIENCE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
FIRST FORMAL TALKS BETWEEN
RUSSIA AND UKRAINE'S NEW
GOVERNMENT TO EASE THE UNREST.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
AND I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE
YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.